 
The Economic Impact of HPAI on U.S. Egg 
Consumers: Estimating a $1.41 Billion Loss in 
Consumer Surplus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
James L. Mitchell, Jada M. Thompson, and Trey Malone 
 
 
 
 
 
Agricultural Economics & Agribusiness Department 
Dale Bumpers College of Agriculture, Food & Life Sciences 
and 
University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture 
 
 
 
 
FC-2025-001 
 
 
 
 
Feburary 2025 
 
 
   

The Economic Impact of HPAI on U.S. Egg Consumers: Estimating a $1.41 Billion 
Loss in Consumer Surplus 
 
James L. Mitchell, Jada M. Thompson, and Trey Malone 
 
Billions of eggs are grown in large -scale, layer houses each year in the United States. 
These eggs are distributed through grocery stores, food service industries, and processed 
into liquid or powdered forms for use in various food products . American per capita egg 
consumption will reach 275 eggs in 2025 (USDA-ERS, 2024). Because eggs are a staple 
food, any disruption in production —such as highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) —
can have a noticeable impact on availability and prices in grocery stores acro ss the 
country. 
 
HPAI is a highly contagious viral disease that affects domestic and wild birds, with the 
largest economic impacts derived from commercial poultry. Often carried by migratory 
waterfowl, the virus can spread rapidly through direct contact, contaminated surfaces, or 
airborne transmission. HPAI is noted for its high mortality (>75%) in infected flocks, often 
requiring large-scale depopulation efforts to control viral spread. The U.S. Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) and other regulatory bodies monitor and respo nd to outbreaks to 
mitigate their economic and food supply impact . Despite these efforts, the loss of birds 
continues to grow each year, dramatically influencing egg supply chains  and, 
consequently, consumer prices. 
 
Given the size of these impacts, empirically estimating the size of the economic loss is of 
critical importance. This paper extends the findings of Mitchell, Thompson, and Malone 
(2024), which established an appropriate framework for modeling HPAI disease dynamics 
within the egg supply chain, accounting for both the lagged and cumulative effects of HPAI 
on egg prices;  When a flock is depopulated due to HPAI, it takes six months for a new 
flock to reach maturity and begin laying eggs. Additionally, each successive depopulation 
compounds the impact on egg prices. 
 
According to USDA-APHIS (2024), HPAI affected 38.4 million commercial egg laying birds 
and 29 flocks in 2024. As a result, we estimate a 9% increase in retail egg prices, 
independent of other sources of egg price inflation. Using own-price elasticities of demand 
from the literature, we estimate that quantity demanded for retail eggs declined by 2%. 
 
This reduction in consumption, coupled with higher prices, led to an estimated consumer 
surplus loss of $1.41 billion  (Table 1). This estimate reflects the economic burden on 
consumers due to reduced availability and affordability of eggs following HPAI outbreaks. 
The magnitude of these losses underscores the importance of understanding how 
disease outbreaks in the egg supply chai n influence consumer welfare and market 
dynamics. 
 
Table 1. HPAI impacts on retail egg prices, quantities, and consumer surplus 
Variable Value 
Retail Egg Price ($/doz) 2.73 
Per Capita Egg Consumption (eggs) 202 
Own-Price Elasticity  -0.228 
Retail Egg Price (% Chg) 9% 
Quantity Demand (% Chg) -2% 
Consumer Surplus (million dollars) -1,414.28 
Note: Retail Egg Price ($/doz) represents the estimated average price of eggs in 2024 in 
the absence of HPAI cases. Per Capita Egg Consumption (eggs) refers to projected 2024 
shell egg consumption per person under the same assumption. Own-Price Elasticity is an 
estimated average demand elasticity from the literature, indicating the percentage change 
in quantity demanded for a 1% change in price. Retail Egg Price (% Chg)  and Quantity 
Demand (% Chg)  represent the percentage change in retail egg prices and quantity 
demanded due to HPAI out breaks in 2024. Consumer Surplus (million dollars)  reflects 
the estimated economic loss to consumers resulting from higher egg prices and lower 
consumption. 
These estimates come with a few important caveats. First, the estimate assumes that 
consumer preferences and purchasing behavior remained stable, meaning that 
consumers responded to price increases in the same way as they have in the past. 
Second, the analysis focuses on the direct impact of HPAI on egg prices and consumer 
surplus, meaning it does not account for any indirect effects, such as potential changes 
in producer behavior or government policy responses. Despite these considerations, this 
estimate provides a clear and useful benchmark for understanding how HPAI affected 
egg prices and consumer spending in 2024. 
 
References 
Mitchell, J. L., J. M. Thompson, T. Malone. 2024. “Biological Lags and Market Dynamics 
in Vertically Coordinated Food Supply Chains: HPAI Impacts on U.S. Egg Prices.” Food 
Policy 126: 102655 
 
USDA-APHIS. 2024. 2022-2024 Confirmations of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza in 
Commercial and Backyard Flocks. Available at: https://www.aphis.usda.gov/livestock-
poultry-disease/avian/avian-influenza/hpai-detections.   
 
USDA-ERS. 2024. Livestock, Livestock, Dairy, and Poultry Outlook: July 2024. Available 
at: https://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/pub-details?pubid=109570  